This lecture is brought to you by Buford Road Baptist Church.
The speaker today is Pastor David Kogel.
We've been teaching on prayer and the series of prayer, we talked about, I gave you some introductory techniques as we get our heart ready to go to the Lord in prayer.
Things that we can prepare ourselves as we pray
and see great answers to our prayer.
Sometimes we don't come to the Lord in the way that we should because of things going on in our life, but we can get those things taken care of.
We can see answers to our prayers.
And I know you have seen many answers to prayer in your life.
So after our introductory lessons, I kind of want to get into when we pray.
And I went back to the Old Testament and I began to
look at different areas through the Bible when folks prayed, when individuals prayed, when groups prayed, when Jesus Himself was on this earth and He prayed, things happen when we pray.
And it's very important that we use that tool of prayer.
So today I want to go to Genesis chapter 20 and we want to look at what I call a prayer for restoration or life.
a prayer for restoration or life.
And you know, when things happen in people's lives and it can involve them physically, many times we find ourselves praying that the Lord will heal them, touch them like we are for the pastor today.
And we pray for restoration.
We pray that things will be made right whatever's going on in their life.
So prayer is a wonderful thing.
but prayer is not just to get us out of trouble.
You know, a lot of people use that just for that.
Oh, man, I've got myself in a mess here, man.
I've got to pray and ask the Lord to help me.
And there's nothing wrong with that.
We can do that.
We need to do that.
But for some folks, when everything is smooth and everything's all right, there's no big concerns going on,
then prayer kind of goes by the wayside sometimes, and it's kind of put on the back burner.
But think about it this way.
It can also be used to keep us out of trouble before the trouble even comes.
You're already in touch with God on a regular basis.
You're praying.
You're asking Him to be with you and help you along every day.
We never know what we're going to face in a day.
So I find that
Prayer is something that we can use all the time and we talked about that little verse in Thessalonians that 517 and it's simply pray without ceasing.
That means have your heart and that attitude of prayer.
Have your spiritual being in touch with God and be ready to always to pray and talk to the Lord.
Not just when trouble has come your way.
Today we find
in this particular text that there was a great failure on Abraham's part.
And actually, this is the third major failure, and I love Abraham in the Bible.
Abraham done some great things, but Abraham was human, just like all of us.
And Abraham had some failures happen in his life, and they're recorded in the Scripture after he came to the land of Canaan.
So we find that the first of these failures here
was when he lied in Egypt that Sarah was his sister.
Sarah, of course, was his wife.
The second failure we also find is that he was having a child by Hagar.
And then the third failure was the subject of our lesson today.
And that was a repeat of the first.
So in these failures here, Abraham's going to learn a great lesson.
And prayer is going to come into picture, and it's going to change things.
So I want to examine this failure in Abraham, and I want to consider what happened when he was restored through prayer.
So let's look at Genesis chapter 1.
They'll put that up on the screen.
And let's begin reading in verse number 1.
And we're going to see just exactly what took place.
Genesis 20 and verse 1, if you're turning into your Bible there, Abraham journeyed from Thence toward the South country and dwelt in Kadesh and Shur and sojourned in Gyar.
And Abraham said of Sarah, his wife, she is my sister.
And Abimelech the king of Gyar sent and took Sarah.
So what happened in the very opening of this chapter here is that
Abraham's got something on his mind that he thinks he can get it fixed if he does it this particular way.
Isn't that just like us sometimes?
We come up with circumstances in life where we think, well, I can figure this out.
I think I can work this out.
I think that I can come up with what needs to be done here without even considering asking the Lord, without even praying to the Lord.
He thought someone in Geir would put him to death
in order to obtain Sarah, his wife.
So the practice of deceit was a weakness in Abraham's character.
We begin to see that.
And you know, I think about that.
We all have weaknesses in our character.
We all have something that's not our strong point.
Something maybe that you need to pray and ask the Lord on a daily basis for help.
I don't know.
But we all have that particular thing going on.
And whatever the weakness is,
I think it's good for us to be put on guard that that particular weakness in our character is something that the devil is going to key in on as well.
If he can use the weakness in that area to help you have a defeated life, help you fail, help you do some things that you're going to regret, he's certainly going to do that.
Abraham had been sometime in Hebron.
And it seems all of a sudden he wanted to pick up and go southward towards Egypt.
And he wanted to do well between Kadesh and Sher.
And so he journeyed in gear.
Now, the move that he made doesn't really seem like it reflects a lot of wisdom on Abraham's part.
Because Abraham already, I mean, when you think about it, he already felt like,
that they would kill him, that something would happen bad to him if he moved there.
Well, why and where do you want to move there if that's the case?
But he's beginning to think about these folks in Giyar and how they were pagan.
They had low morals.
They might even kill me so they can have Sarah.
So if he thought it was that bad, I don't know why he made that move.
You know, if the Holy Spirit prompts us to say, hey, you really don't need to get involved in that.
You really don't need to go there.
That's not going to do you any good.
That's not God's will for your life to be involved in going in that direction.
If we listen to that, that may save us a lot of heartache down the road.
But like on the other hand, if we listen to God's will and He says, I'm opening this door for you, walk through that door, trust in me,
then you'll find that something great is going to happen in your life.
So I don't know why he made that move, but one thing I have found out is that this temptation will come no matter where or who we are, as long as we're on this earth.
And if we're put in the wrong place, did you know that temptation is even more powerful?
More powerful to overcome.
than if we were in the right place.
So make sure you're walking in the right steps.
You're following the Lord.
You're doing what He's called you to do.
Because when we're in the wrong place, the temptation will come and it will be harder to overcome that.
Abraham is walking into this situation.
Same situation he faced in Egypt.
And the thing I'm amazed at
is that Sarah is 89 years of age 89 and I can only read the scriptures and say she must have been a beautiful woman even at 89 years of age because he's thinking at 89 years of age someone's going to take my wife they're going to take her so I don't know what kind of outward attraction would cause the king
And I'm sure the king had much younger women.
I'm sure he had many women, but yet he would sin for Sarah.
So she had something going for her because she was invited to join in with the king.
And so we find that in verse three, but God came to a bimalak in a dream by night.
So something has happened and God's already starting to move.
You know, we're not only seeing the deceit here is going to take place, but we're going to see that reprimanding the man of God, Abraham, for what he's doing is wrong.
So he's going to have to hear from the Lord.
Sooner or later, we are reprimanded for our sins.
And you know, I would rather the Holy Spirit convict me of sin while I'm here on this earth and have to answer for it in heaven.
I'd rather get it under the blood now, get it taken care of now.
But thankfully, it came sooner for Abimelech and Abraham.
And so we're going to find out here that God is going to change some folks lives.
So in that verse three, Abimelech has sent for her.
He has decided that he wants to make her his wife.
And so he goes to bed that night and in a dream by night, God
said to him, Behold thou art but a dead man, for the woman which thou hast taken, for she is a man's wife."
Wow.
That's pretty strong words to wake up to in a dream, isn't it?
But he's saying, you know what?
Your life is about to end here because of what you did.
So this is what I call a life-and-death situation.
Learn from the Word of God, the spoken word, what's right and what's wrong.
Aren't you glad that we can open up our Bible and read and it guides us and helps us know what's right and what's wrong?
We have to trust what the Word of God says.
We have to depend upon it.
And it will guide us.
So if the Word is our rule, our guide, our authority, it will keep us right morally and spiritually.
God's message here, just like the gospel message, it told Abimelech, you know what?
I'm telling you the way either you're going to live or you're going to die.
I'm telling you one way or the other.
So Abimelech, because of his sin of taking Sarah, was under the sentence of death.
But the Word of God is going to show him the way of life.
You know, even for us today, what's the word say?
For the wages of sin is what?
Death.
But aren't you glad for that little?
But the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.
So spiritually we all die when we sin, when we're born into this world, we're born in sin.
But thank the Lord, but the gift of God, Jesus came that we may have life.
So in this situation here of a Benelak, it's a matter of life or death.
And so we think about, while guilty of having Sarah under this curse, Abimelech did not have...
He didn't have bad motives in mind.
You've got to go back to what Abraham did.
Abraham lied about it.
She's my sister.
She's open for taking here.
If you want to take your wife, you can take her because she's just my sister.
Abimelech said, okay, that's no problem.
But look at verse number four.
But Bimelech had not come near her.
In other words, he had known her in a way that you would know a woman.
He had got to that point.
And he said, Lord, wilt thou slay also a righteous nation?
Verse five.
Said he not unto me, talking about Abraham, she is my sister.
And she even herself said,
Sarah chimed right along with it.
He is my brother.
Now, look, in the integrity of my heart and innocence of my hands, have I done this?
So, Abimelech said, well, wait a minute now.
God, you didn't give me some strong words here.
But I just want to be honest with you.
I'm going by what I heard, what he said, what she said, and listen,
I didn't want to sin here.
I didn't want to do the wrong thing.
I thought I was okay in what I was doing.
So to the shame of Abraham, it was Abimelech who actually came out the better man in this particular incident.
Abimelech had investigated to make sure she was fair game.
God would have known the motives and all that was behind Abimelech
Taking, sir, God already knew that.
God knew.
You know, we may fall into something not knowing the situation.
We may get involved in something having no idea that that's going to bring us problems down the road.
We may innocently thought we were doing okay in the walk of life that we're doing.
God's not going to punish us for that, but He is going to show us the way if we'll continue that He's going to show us it's the wrong way.
He's going to guide us in the right way.
So that's why prayer is important.
That's why it's important to stay in touch with God.
Let's look at verse number six.
And God said unto him in a dream, Yea, I know that thou didst this in the integrity of thy heart.
For I also withheld thee from sinning against me.
Look at that.
Therefore suffered I thee not to touch her.
In other words, God intervened.
We looked at those words when He said, you're but a dead man and God's gone man.
God's really stating facts to him, but God is also here making sure that Abimelech does the right thing.
He's given him that opportunity here.
So when we look at that, He said, I know what you did.
I know that it was in the integrity of thy heart to sin and do wrong here.
I know all of that.
He said, that's why I'm coming to you.
You know, I'm so thankful we have the Holy Spirit to convict us and lead us in things.
How many times have we just been going on through life and all of a sudden it just hits us like, man, this is not right.
I don't care how good this sounds or how much
easier this way seems to be.
It's not what God wants me to do.
And as we listen to that, we can sit back and thank God that He intervened for us.
Thank God that He, you know, how many times have we looked back and said, man, sure Him glad I didn't go down that way.
Sure glad I didn't keep that up.
Thank God He helped me get away from that.
So,
We see that we read here that he wanted to restore.
Now what did he want to tell him to do?
He said, now therefore restore the man his wife, for he is a prophet.
Restore.
You remember what I said at the beginning?
This is a lesson of being restored.
And he is going to restore her
back to the West you're supposed to be.
And things are going to be turned around.
Well, God told Abimelech that Abraham was his prophet.
Now, Abraham did wrong, but he still was God's prophet.
Abraham had been in the country for just a little while possibly, but no one of you...
He said, I know you don't know he's a prophet.
He's just been here for a little bit here.
But I'm telling you, he's a prophet of mine, and what you did is against him.
Let's not talk about what he did right now.
Let's just make sure you get straight.
You know, aren't we sometimes quick to say, well, God, you know, I wouldn't have done that unless so-and-so would have done that with me.
Or I wouldn't have done that unless they tell me to do that or asked me to do that.
And we can always point the finger at someone else.
But you know what?
We've got to always answer for ourselves.
That's the one we have to answer.
I can't answer for what someone else is.
Now they may try to mislead me and God will deal with them.
But I have to put that in His hands and I have to make sure that I'm right.
So I want you to note something else about the man, Abimelech.
Notice in verse number 8.
He said, Therefore Abimelech rose early in the morning
called his servants and told all these things in their ears, and the men were sore afraid.
So what did he do?
He said, hey, if I was coming a minute, I got to tell you something.
God spoke to me in a dream last night, and hey, I got to get my house in order here.
I got to get some things changed.
I got to do something here.
So Abimelech believed God was prompt, and he was prompting obeying God's order.
He rises up in the morning, it's fresh on his mind.
He knows what he needs to do to take care of the situation.
And we're going to find in some of these verses here, Abraham excuses that he gives and what he did.
He's going to blame the character of the people where he was at.
And he even blamed God.
But his excuses did not hold water.
as most excuses don't.
We can blame a lot of folks and a lot of things on what's happening in our life.
But they're not going to hold water.
We really need to realize most of the problem is us, and we have to make sure that we're doing the right thing.
So I want you to notice that after He gathers these men together, He realizes that I need to do the right thing.
And I believe he's involving these men because he wants them to realize, hey, I want you to see what I did, what God wants me to do.
And so with Abraham's deceitfulness about Sarah, you know what?
It's causing a strain here between Abraham and Abimelech, and reconciliation is needed.
It's needed to happen between these two men if it won't get along in the future.
And I'm glad to report that it did take place.
And they did reconcile.
So he is going to do the right thing.
So look at verse number nine, Abimelech called Abraham and said unto him, What hast thou done unto us?
And what have I offended thee that thou hast brought on me and on my kingdom a great sin?
Thou hast done deeds unto me that ought not to be done."
So what is he realizing here?
He's saying, you know what, Abraham?
You've caused a problem here.
You've decided to be not true with me.
You've decided not to be honest with me.
And because of this, then I'm going to have to get things straight.
But I wish you wouldn't have done that.
You know, when I often think about
And I've heard people say this many times, what I do with my life, that's just me.
I mean, I can do whatever I want to do, because it's my life.
And so, if I do wrong, so what?
If I do right, okay.
You know what?
Your life can also affect other people, especially as a Christian.
I keep hearing that song on the radio
And I've heard the saying many times that many times you are the only Jesus that people ever see.
You can't get them to come into the church house.
They probably won't even tune in online to listen to a message.
But you know what?
They're going to be around you.
You're going to run into them.
You're going to see them on a daily basis.
And whether you know it or not,
They got their eye on you.
They got their ears tuned to you.
I remember it was a couple of weeks ago when something dramatic happened at work, and it was kind of unbelievable.
And I was standing around two or three other people, and I said, I can't believe that took place like that.
I couldn't believe it happened like that.
And they thought that I had said something else.
And they stepped back and said, what did you say?
I said, I can't believe that something like this happened.
Well, they thought I had used bad words in some kind of way.
They thought that what they heard and they said, then they said this, I couldn't believe it.
You would even say something like that.
I mean, I've known you.
I've never heard any kind of bad language like that come out of your mouth.
So that's what shocked me so much.
I said, I guarantee you, I didn't say what you think I said.
This is what I said.
But you know what?
It just reminded me that they've been listening to me all along.
They listen to what I say, how I talk.
They listen to things I do or watch things I do.
And they see either the good
They see the Lord.
They see my testimony.
They see what I proclaim as a child of God.
Or else they're going to see something else.
And I know it's no excuse on their part to say, well, you know what?
I don't serve God because of how you are.
They still got to answer for their life.
I realize that.
But folks, it's very important that we realize we're a living testimony every day.
Every day.
And we're human.
We're going to fall sometimes.
We're going to have failure sometimes.
We're going to say things that we shouldn't say.
That's being human.
But I'm so thankful that we can also live a life that people can look at us and say, you know what?
There's something different about that person.
It's something different about their morals, their character.
It's something different when I hear them say things like, thank you, Lord.
When I hear them give praise to God, I see them give the Lord blessing over the food before they even attempt to eat it.
I see all those things.
And I want what they want.
I wish I was there had what they had.
I've had people tell me that over the years that say, I want what you have.
Yeah.
I want what you have.
I remember I was working with a young man one time
He came in and he started working.
He was a great worker and he had come from a troubled background already.
But he seemed to clean up his life and he was getting things under control.
He had lost his license and he went to school and got his license back.
He found him a place to live.
I mean, I was just rejoicing over the change.
I was talking to him about the Lord
and how he could change his life, and he got into church.
And I was just so thankful for that.
And then one day I came in, he was not at work.
He used to be there every day.
He'd missed work again the next day, in the next day.
And the next thing I know, he'd finally come in.
When he'd come in, I took a look at him, and I could see a difference in him.
I could see something had happened to him.
And he had fell back into the old ways that he had before.
He did some crazy things after that on the job and off the job.
He did some unbelievable things.
But I didn't give up on him and I kept praying for him.
And finally he left altogether and just moved on to somewhere else.
I still pray for him, I still think about him, but you know what?
He was the one that came to me one day and said, I want what you have.
And I witnessed to him
I told him, this is not me.
That's anything.
I'm just a sinner saying about the grace of God, and He can change you too.
He was on the right track when He let something overtake Him again.
He didn't put His fully trust in the Lord.
So it is so important that we realize what we do is going to affect others.
And it will always.
Abraham
was a good man.
He's a man of God.
He's a prophet.
And to be a prophet of God, don't you would think, hey, I'm not going to tell a lie about something.
I'm not going to be deceitful about something here, especially my wife.
I'm not going down that road.
But he let something affect him so greatly that he thought that he would even lose his life.
Well, we saw the downward path that he took.
He went and moved to a place that he shouldn't have moved to.
He moved to a place knowing that that was going to cause problems in his life.
Let us remember our walk in life is something the Lord has ordained, I believe.
He's ordained your steps.
The way you should go, how you should live, things you should do.
And if we'll listen to the Lord and walk in His way,
then we won't get affected by a lot of the things and heartaches that come along our way.
The Bible says that He has ordered the steps of a good man.
So He's the pathway.
He's the light.
The Word is the light to our path that we might not sin against God.
We can hide His Word in our heart.
We can trust Him every day along the pathway that we are to take.
So God had to straighten that situation out.
But it was prayer that ended up getting involved in there.
It was things that had to take place that God had to make straight what was crooked.
So we can't blame Abimelech for the whole thing.
He said in the integrity of my heart, I didn't think I was doing the wrong thing.
but yet he found out from God that he was.
And God gave him that ultimatum there.
And Abimelech said, I'm going to get it straight.
I want the relationship straight.
So Abimelech initiated that change that should have taken place.
Look at verse number 10.
Abimelech said unto Abraham, what sawest thou
that Thou hast done this thing.
Look at verse 11, Abraham, because I thought surely the fear of God is not in this place, and they will slay me from my wife's sake.
Surely, you know, Abraham knew that he wasn't in the right place.
He knew that something was wrong here.
He even said God's not in this place.
And they're going to end up killing me.
Look at verse number 12.
And yet indeed she is my sister, she is the daughter of my father, but not the daughter of my mother, and she became my wife.
Look at the next verse.
And it came to pass when God calls me to wander from my father's house, I said unto her, This is thy kindness which thou has shown unto me,
at every place whether we shall come and say, He is my brother.
Abraham had to pray, and he had to make a move.
So what did he do?
Bemalek wanted to get it right.
He took sheep and oxen and men's servants and women's servants and gave them unto Abraham and restored him, Sarah, his wife.
I can see Him now, getting sir right there saying, hey, you need to go where you belong.
You need to get back with your husband.
That's you.
Abraham, that's your wife.
Don't you tell me something like that again.
It's going to affect me.
It's going to affect my kingdom.
It's going to affect everything around here.
So I want to make it straight.
And Bemelech said, behold, my land is before the dwell.
where it pleases thee.
So we're finding here that he said, I'm going to restore not only your wife.
I'm going to give you things to go along with this thing.
I'm going to make sure that everything is right.
And so we find that he is going to do what needs to be done.
Look at verse number 16.
And Sarah said unto him, Behold, I have given thy brother a thousand pieces of silver.
Behold, he is to thee a covering of thine eyes unto all that are with thee, and with all other.
Thus she was reproved."
You know, not only did God restore what needed to be done here, but the Bible says Abraham prayed unto God
and God ended up healing Abimelech, his wife, his servants, and she was able to bear children.
So not only did we have a restoration of Abimelech, because he was a death of life situation, but now life was going to come to Abimelech's wife, who hadn't been able to have children.
I'll tell you folks, when someone prays and gets a hold of God and asks for the things that need to be done in God's will, God can move in that situation.
So somewhere between Abraham's excuses and his praying, he had a change of heart.
You know, had Abraham, let's go back, we're back up here,
Don't you wish he would have prayed?
I know he does before he made his move from Hebron.
Can you imagine how many things would have been different through this whole situation?
I guarantee you, if Abraham would have got down to business with God and said, God, this is what I'm thinking about doing here.
I'm thinking about moving over here.
And I'd like for you to give me the blessing to do that.
God would have said, no.
I'm not going to give you your blessing to do that.
You're not to go down there.
That's not what I need you to do.
If he'd have done that from the beginning, look at all the heartache.
Look at all that situation and when it happened.
And I think about us many times, if we would pray before we make the move, before we get involved in that.
And just like our brother Brian said this morning,
It could be a prayer about your job.
It could be a prayer about your home.
It could be a prayer where you're going to live.
It could be a prayer about having children.
It could be a prayer about anything.
But if we bring it before God, how many times would things be turned around and changed that we wouldn't have to go through that heartache that we went through?
As I said earlier, we can all look back and say, man, I wish that I prayed first.
which I'll assault the Lord first.
So Abraham learned a great lesson.
Prayer is a wonderful thing.
But remember the statement that I said earlier.
Prayer is not just to be used to get us out of trouble.
I thank God it's there for that.
Because the Lord knows we can all get in trouble.
And I'm glad I got a God that's there to hear us.
We can go to say, I need help.
But folks, let's think about it.
It's also a great tool to keep us from getting into trouble.
Preventive.
Those of you that work around machineries, at some point, we have to stop and do some maintenance on a machinery.
At some point, something's got to be done to your vehicle.
You got to change your oil at some time.
You got to do something to it.
Or else I'm going to see you on the side of the road down here.
Are you going to be calling the tow truck?
Because we didn't preventively do what needed to be done.
And folks, in our own spiritual life, let's do some preventive things.
You see, I don't know what's going to happen to me tomorrow.
I don't know what I'm going to face next week.
I don't know what's going to come my way that I did not expect.
So I want to pray and ask the Lord to
for the right move now before I get down there, what's going to take place.
Prayer is a wonderful tool, isn't it?
Let's use it every day.
And let's talk to the Lord on a daily basis and listen to Him.
Amen.
You listen to Pastor David Kogel.
For more information, visit our website at bufordroadbaptistchurch.com.